# PGPBS
Code for the paper: Yongxiang LI, Yu TIAN, Huadong MO, Shichang DU*. (2025). Gaussian Process Controlled B-Spline Surface. INFORMS Journal on Data Science.
------------------------------------------------------------------

Abstract: 
We propose a Gaussian process controlled B-spline surface (GPBSS), which inte- grates the flexibility of B-spline basis functions into the probabilistic framework of Gaussian processes. By leveraging the sparsity inherent in B-spline bases, GPBSS achieves a linear time complexity, making it particularly effective for large-scale datasets in low-dimensional spaces. When compared to current benchmark approx- imations of the standard Kriging model, GPBSS offers a unique balance between computational efficiency and prediction accuracy. Furthermore, we extend the applica- tion of the GPBSS model to Bayesian optimization, enabling efficient optimization of black-box functions. To validate the performance of GPBSS, we conduct a regression study on four large-scale datasets and an optimization study on three complex objec- tive functions. The results demonstrate that our proposed model not only significantly enhances computational efficiency but also excellently balances its prediction accu- racy. Its favorable trade-off makes GPBSS a valuable tool for data-intensive regression and optimization tasks in low-dimensional scenarios such as medical imaging, geospa- tial analysis, and additive manufacturing, where data are sampled at high rates or over long intervals.